And he ended up as a full general command of the Air
Force Command, and he retired not too long ago.
Yeah, right. Oh, yeah, I remember he was the first
black officer in the Air Force. I mean the highest,
the first one to become general, I mean. Yeah,
yeah. And he was under your command? At Massawa,
yeah. He must have been good then. Yeah, he was
real, I mean he was real good. Mm-hmm. And my wife
was mentioning last night that actually we had one
colored pilot that came into Massawa down to
Isozuki when we were there. And no one wanted to fly
with him. Really? And so I said, okay, I'll be his
co-pilot. So I took on the job of being his
co-pilot. Then it just, everything fell in the
line. So he wasn't...
He wasn't put on a pedestal or he had any problems,
which I'd forgotten about, but he was probably my
first, and I don't remember his name. Well that
was, you were demonstrating to them that if you
could do it, they could do it. Yeah, they could do
it. If I didn't mind by then, then they shouldn't
mind type of thing. Well that was a good idea. Now,
it seems like what you're doing when you become the
commander of the 39th Air Division is you're
immediately trying to demonstrate that you're
different from the former commander. Well, I
think that's a... Is that the theme? That's the
theme. Because he had been a poor commander and you
wanted to get this place in shape. Now, was that a
threat that your commander told you that he's
giving you three months? Did you take it as a
threat? Oh, yeah, well, no. Well, actually, I took
it a different way in that I took it with the idea
that he'd just give me a free rein of doing whatever
I thought was necessary to getting Masawa kind of
straightened out, and that he wasn't going to be
sending any IG teams up there to investigate some
of my programs or anything like this. And of course
I kept him informed. Sure. What he think of sending
250 men back to the states? Well,
he didn't object. I mean as far as I was concerned, I
figured I could get along without those 250
without even any replacements.
I think some of the men and people when they got back
to the port of embarkation here in the States were
taken off of the discharge list and reassigned.
But
he supported me a hundred percent. Another thing
you said about that is that I could do it then, but I
probably couldn't get away with that today in the
Air Force. What could you explain? Well, today why
you have the minority is the
underdog type of thing, that you just can't
discharge a lot of people. for offenses such as
being drunk and disorderly, this type of thing.
And it's a lot harder to bypass what you might call
civil rights. I mean, this is a civil right. I mean,
an individual, some guy is just deciding that
because he has been drunk and disorderly two or
three times that he was unsatisfactory to the Air
Force and he was sending him home just upon his own
judgment. The individual's civil rights were
being violated. So you had to go into a big board and
have a group of individuals decide whether or not I
was right or wrong. But did you think back in 1959
that you were violating their civil rights? And do
you think that today? No, I don't think. I just
think that it was just a matter of circumstances.
And I would certainly say that a percentage of
those, maybe 25%, or 33% or 30%, could have been
rehabilitated.
As far as I'm concerned at the time, I just didn't
have time. What happened to this man, this
Lieutenant Colonel? He was a fairly high ranking
officer, and he was the highest one that you sent
back. What happened to him? He was one of the ones
that was pulled off at the POE and reassigned.
I mean, as far as I was concerned, it was always
alright with me. I didn't make any difference. You
just wanted to get rid of them from your base. I
wanted to get them out of my base. Now, you were
talking about being drunk and disorderly. What
other type of offenses would you send these
officers and enlisted men home for? Just any time
they went up twice to Captain's Mass or? No, well,
see you had an article, what you call an article 15,
where the individual appeared before the
commander, his commander, for being absent
from AWOL for a couple days, or
numerous speeding violations on base,
or which indicated that he really didn't pay too
much attention to regulation. And in those cases,
he had to have done this two or three times, I mean
four, five, six times. It wasn't just a one or two or
three time offense. So I was looking for
individuals who really didn't pay too much
attention to regulations and that they're
maintaining airplanes, why they would have the
same attitude. You also mentioned, one of the
things that you mentioned was some gentleman, and
this I think is interesting, some gentleman,
something about his morals. He was married and he
was running around with Japanese women or
something like that. Well, he was living, he was
sleeping off base with some Japanese woman. He had
a wife and a bunch of kids at home. Back in the United
States. Back in the United States. And was it
pretty typical to discipline back in 1959 in the
50s Air Force? Was it fairly typical for a general
officer, his commanding officer then, to
discipline this man? Was he an enlisted man or an
officer? No, he was an officer. He was an officer.
And I consider that as conduct unbecoming of an
officer and a gentleman. And it was just one of my
standards. Maybe somebody else wouldn't have...
Wouldn't have done that. But it straightens up the
base real fast. I mean, maybe I just select one, and
he goes on. But all the rest of them are doing the
same thing. They move back on base real fast.
OK. Now, what other responsibilities did you have
besides getting this base into shape as the
commander of the 39th Air Division? Well, there
are numerous things that you do, whether it was not
too long after the war or after the Korean War. And
you, as the air bases
closed up, the Air Force air bases closed up, all of
the spare equipment on base, on those bases, like
was moved down to Misawa. So you end up on base with
numerous warehouses full of all kinds of
equipment. I think we had, going around and
searching all the buildings, we found around a
dozen rotating beacons that you put up on a tower at
each base so that the pilot can see it and head.
Well, we had about eight there. that had been
shipped in or offloaded from some boat probably
during, after
the war or after World War II or during the Korean
War. And so we established a program of of shipping
out, declaring a surplus, all of these spare
equipment. And we shipped out millions of
dollars, declared a surplus, and shipped them
back to the States, or shipped them to other bases
where you had a need for them. And so you get your
supply down. Instead of being in four warehouses,
you get your supply down into two warehouses.
And you go through your stock records and the same
thing. You have the items that you currently use.
Like in an automotive parts warehouse, you'd have
six
generators for one particular Chevrolet sedan.
and you look at the record and maybe you used one of
those per year and you had six of them. Well, you
declare a surplus of six of them to be shipped to
some other base or to be disposed of.
So you got into a stock record type of management
program where you just saved the Air Force a lot of
money. And you have some time you have to warehouse
that for six years while it would probably become
rusted anyway. So we had a big program established
to cut down and as commander I think that there's
nothing more important than having someone hear
the footsteps of the boss. And you go around and
check your stock records and he knows you're going
to come around and and check his stock records, and
so he will do it himself. When I left there, I was
given a metal machine, the sheet metal shopper
made up a box,
which is bits and pieces. I was always going around
and opening drawers and checking on all these
spare parts that they had. So they made up this
kit and they had everything in the world. This was
presented to me when I left there. Presented to me
and they had everything in there. They had a dead
frog that somebody had opened a drawer and there
was a dead frog in it. So they dried, you know, So
they put that in there. So all kinds of
miscellaneous bits and pieces that
I was known for. And the other thing you can do is,
and this is kind of, I'll agree this is some of these
kind of nasty, you know. I'd go down to BX during
duty hours and I'd stop maybe three or four airmen
and find out where they worked. And then I'd run out
of the BX and down to the flight line and I'd go to the
line chief and I'd say, Robin, I'd like to look at
some of your airplanes here and see what you're
doing.
And so these boys, there were a couple of boys who
were down at the BX, I said, well, where is John Doe?
He said, oh, he's around here someplace.
And I said, well, why don't we find him? I know he's
down there, he's down at the BX in the base exchange
or down there getting coffee or something. And
so we'd try to find him. And then we couldn't find
him. And I said, well, it looks like to me that you
just don't need him. So I just cut one guy off over
this guy's management. Well, he was maybe a may
have been assistant crew chief or helper or
something of this sort. I said, well, I'll just cut
one man off your authorization for manpower. And
he told me that he had given him permission to go to
BX to get a cup of coffee. That's all I wanted. I
mean, as long as he knew where the guy was. But if he
didn't know where he was, then I knew he wasn't
supervising very well. So you were keeping them on
their toes. Oh, yeah. Well, that's the type of
individual I was. I delved into all the little
activities of everybody. And I think, as I said, I
think there's nothing more important than
hearing the footsteps of the boss. And then I would
be out on the flight line watching the safety
procedures and refueling airplanes. Prior to
that they had some airplanes burn up when they were
refueling. Well the airplane wouldn't be
properly grounded or the
fuel nozzle wasn't properly grounded when it came
in contact with the airplane and that causes spark
and that's how it burned up. So you have to Then
you'd get everybody's brother out there showing
them what they were doing differently. So you had
to be smart enough to know what the procedures were
to start with.
That's the type of commander I was. I was a detailed
type of commander. I got into everybody's
business and I didn't sit around the office very
much. writing instructions to somebody. I was out
there and I got the best people in the top jobs. I
mean the best majors were the squadron commanders
and the best
sergeants were the crew chiefs and they didn't
like it because it's cold on the outside. as long as
they got behind the program. And then when you get
something started, like this is the best air
force, best radio school, the same thing there.
This is the best fighter out there. And everybody
gets behind it. In fact, you get to the point where
in some cases the pilots took unnecessary risk in
landing an airplane with a dead engine on the
runway. So you give him heck for taking too much of a
chance, because you're really interested in
saving his life, and it would have been better for
him to jump out. But we had a guy, and of course you
laud him for doing it, but you think he's crazy for
doing it to start with. But he landed an F-102.
without engines on the runway. He just glided in?
Well, he just glided in. And he did a marvelous job.
And so you didn't have an accident. So you went nine
months without an accident. And you had to be kind
of a showman type ship, I think, to be a real good
commander. Like before I went up to Missoula,
General Burns had a flying safety conference of
all the wing commanders and their flying safety
officers and what have you. So, at 379th I had a very
good flying safety program there. So, I had gone
around to all the bases, the wings before I went up
there. and looked at everybody's flying safety
program and inspected their bases. So I knew what
everybody was doing good and what everybody was
doing bad. And you just plagiarize. You
plagiarize all good ideas. And so when I went up
there, I had a list of all the best pilots and the
ones that had two or three accidents. So you knew
the ones to watch on. you knew what everybody else
was doing, so it is safety. I had not just been up to
Pasado maybe a week. I went down and told them, I
said, I'm going to go six months without an
aircraft accident. And I told them, this is what
I'm going to do. And one of them was that the top
maintenance officer in the squadron was going to
be the flying safety officer. So not only was he
Main, he was also a pilot. No, they were all pilots.
Not only that, was he a good pilot, but he was also a
good maintenance officer. We had on base a RECO
squadron which belonged to the wing of Tachikawa.
I wrote a note to the squadron commander, told him
to provide me with the best pilot and the best
maintenance officer. Well, he furnished me with
the name of an inexperienced pilot, although he
may have been, he was young, so I called him up and I
said, look, you provide the guy that was not
qualified, so here's the guy I want. So I just
picked out his best guy and said, yeah, he's a
flying safety officer for this squadron. Well,
the wing commander got upset with me, but as I
announced at this down there. I said, well, this is
what I did. Of course, John Burns backed me up and
after the other wing commander of this
reconnaissance outfit we became very good
friends because his squadron up there did the same
things everybody else was doing. So you get up
there with a flare and say, you're going to do this.
Well, I mean, you're taking a big chance. I'll
agree you're taking a big chance. So you had put
pressures on you to be sure that you could produce.
What did General Burns think? It sounds like you
had quite a few accomplishments up there. What did
General Burns think of this? Well, see, I was,
that's when I was selected from up there and went
into the PACAF headquarters. recommended for
promotion to Major General there and I don't know.
You were as, when you were in Missoula, you were
recommended? No, well he selected me for, see that
was a Brigadier General slot, so he selected me to
come to headquarters PACAF and to be the, his
deputy for plans and operations. as a result of
what I did up there. I see, so he was quite happy with
your job. Oh yeah, he was. And he tried to promote
you to a two-star general. Oh yeah, he would come up
on visits and listen to General O'Donnell. He
said, I had everybody so scared up there that they
were just afraid to have an accident. So, I mean,
kidding, you know. But, no, I thoroughly enjoyed
it up there. It was up in the boondocks of Massawa.
We, in the wintertime, no one ever bothered you
because you were just almost no then, and so you
just were able to run your base just about the way
you wanted to, your division. and I think
everybody pretty well liked it. Sounds like a real
challenge too. Oh yeah. So I stayed two years up
there and that was probably my, I enjoyed that
probably as good as anything because I knew what I
was doing. At that stage you get to the point where
you know exactly what you're doing. See back in the
315th division way back at Itazuki where that was
really your first command and the rest of them you
were training, you were in training. That was the
first flying command that you had, so you really
didn't know what you were doing.
Then I moved from there into PACAF headquarters.
Before we get to Hawaii, let's talk about waste and
military. Often, every time a fiscal budget comes
up, people are talking about waste and military.
It sounds like you're trying to prevent that. It
sounds like one of your major jobs is the 39th Air
Division, as the commander there was, to cut
waste. Is that the way military commanders
operate? Well, I think that you have a number of
problems. One of them is Occasionally
you come down from the Secretary of Defense an
automatic cut. You have to cut 5% of your
personnel. Well, you have to keep about a 5%
cushion because if you really did your best job and
say, okay, I can cut this guy and this guy and this
guy out of the staff and I can get along with 200 less
people, and this gets down to the bare bones
situation, then somebody higher up will say
automatically you just cut 5%. Well, then you have
a problem, because then you're below what
requires to get your job done. So you do have to keep
a little slack in. But otherwise, as far as
management of materiel, why I think that the Air
Force has some of the best managers that you can
find. I mean,
you hear that they sent me to all kinds of schools. I
mean, they train you in management. I'd go on to
Orlando, take a high-level management course.
George Washington University, why they had...
management course of four or five weeks that you
attend. They give you plenty of opportunity to
become a good manager. As
far as I'm concerned,
the managers in the Air Force
are It's about as good as you can find anywhere in
the world. I think the only problem you have is
they're underpaid. You just think of a squaring
commander that has 25 airplanes and
whatever it is, 300 or 400 people that he's
running, and you're paying him a paltry salary of
maybe $18,000 a year or $17,000 a year. And you get
out in civilian life, and you look at some salesman
who works for a wholesale grocery company, an
institutional grocer, and he's making $60,000 a
year as both a basic salary plus a bonus. And he's
home Friday afternoon at around 2 o'clock. He has
no responsibilities until Monday morning. He
goes out and makes his calls again. And it's to me
why the cream of the Air Force, a guy if he's real
smart, he won't stay in the Air Force. There are so
many jobs in civilian life that if you,
and I'm on a soapbox now, that the commanders,
these guys are willing to get out in front and make
decisions. they are the ones that we should be
paying. Yeah.
Now that we're on this topic, we have a similar
situation in the profession of teaching. That's
right. In which people who have gone to school and
done a lot of research and written many different
articles and books, publications, are making
maybe $20,000, $30,000 a year, where if they had
that type of a position, or they might be a
department head like at Texas A&M, but if they had
that type of position where they'd be in charge of
40 or 50 people, they'd be making three or four
times that much in the business world. But the
question is, Is there a sense of duty in both of
these types of jobs? In the Air Force, for example,
isn't pay secondary to the challenge and to the
duty, or am I being too idealistic? Can I get a cup of
coffee? No, you just go ahead. Would you like one?
Well, why don't we cut it off, and I'll get a cup of
tea.